A beach in southern Italy.
Night, 8th century BC. A Greek ship
scrapes into the shallows, overloaded
with jars, tools,
and families. Men jump into waist-deep
water,
dragging the hull before the surf
smashes it open. Somewhere in the dark,
you can hear dogs and maybe people, or
maybe it's just the wind.
No one here is guaranteed to welcome
them, and turning back means dying at
sea. So, why did Greeks gamble
everything to build cities on this
coast? And what happened when a rising
Rome finally pushed south? Long before
the Roman Empire became the dominant
power of the Mediterranean, many parts
of southern Italy were shaped [music] by
Greek settlers and Greek-speaking
city-states that dominated the key
stretches of coastline, ports, and
trade. Beginning around the 8th century
BC, Greek settlers crossed the Ionian
Sea and founded cities along the Italian
coast. This region later became known as
Magna Graecia, or Greater Greece. Cities
like Tarentum, Sybaris, and Neapolis
flourished. They became busy hubs of
Greek life, filled with trade, learning,
art, and new ideas. Over time, these
cities influenced the people around
them, [music] and later left a lasting
impact on Roman art, education, and
religion. This is the story of the
Greeks in Italy, how they transformed
the south, and how Rome eventually
absorbed their world while inheriting
much of its [music] culture.
Nearly 2,800
years ago, the Italian peninsula was a
very different place. It was a patchwork
of communities and rising powers with
its own tradi- -tions and its own trade
links, but nothing like the dense chain
of Greek-style city life that would soon
appear along parts of the coast. Then,
something changed. Ships appeared on the
horizon, carrying people and customs
from a land to the east. Archaeology
suggests that, beginning around the 8th
century BC, Greek settlement in Italy
took off through many separate ventures,
not one single planned migration. The
earliest Greek settlement is thought to
have been founded by the Euboeans from
Chalcis and Eretria. They founded
Pithecussae in the mid-8th century BC on
what is now the island of Ischia, just
off the coast of Naples.
Shortly after their arrival, the
Euboeans went on to establish the first
major Greek colony on the Italian
mainland, founding Cumae in the 8th
century BC. This settlement became a key
center of the spread of Greek culture,
and it helped pass on a Euboean-style
alphabet that influenced Etruscan
writing and later [music] the Latin
alphabet. A few decades after the
initial Euboean settlers arrived, new
waves of Greeks followed. Among them
were the Achaeans, who founded powerful
colonies of their own. Two of the most
important were Sybaris and Croton, both
of which were situated on the Gulf of
Taranto. Meanwhile, the Spartans left
their own mark on Italy. They founded
their well-known and only [music]
Italian colony, Tarentum, in the Gulf of
Taranto. Legend say its founder,
Phalanthus, was told by an oracle
[music]
to travel to a place where the rain fell
from a clear sky.
In later retellings, rain from a clear
sky is explained [music]
as tears falling onto him from his wife,
Aethra, in a moment [music] of despair.
This led him to a place near Torre
Saturo, a few miles south [music] of
modern Taranto. An even older legend
suggests a Greek figure known as Evander
might have founded a city on the site
that later developed into the city of
Rome. The 1st century BC Greek historian
Dionysius of Halicarnassus wrote that
Evander was raised in Pallantium, just
west of the present-day city of Tibur.
When he became an adult, he migrated
[music] to central Italy in Latium.
Here, he founded a city also known as
Pallantium on the banks of the Tiber
River, which later became the Palatine
Hill in Rome.
While there's no direct evidence to
suggest Evander built his city here,
archaeological evidence has confirmed
Rome was settled long before its
traditional founding by Romulus in 753
BC, and Evander's story should be
treated as myth, not proof of a Greek
founding of Rome. Excavations have found
huts on Palatine Hill that date back as
far as the 10th and 9th centuries BC,
and early finds, including imported
goods and pottery in later layers, show
that the area was not cut off from
long-distance contacts long before Rome
became Rome. What drove these early
Greeks from their homeland remains up
for debate. For a long time, researchers
argued that hardships in Greece, such as
limited land, scarce resources, and
possibly even famine, forced travelers
to migrate. However, [music]
more recently, some have suggested it
might have been driven by the desire to
expand and create more economic
opportunities. In reality, [music] it
was often a mix. Land pressure, politics
at home, and the promise of trade and
status abroad. What is clear is the
outcome. By the 6th and 5th centuries
BC, Greek colonies in Italy and Sicily
had reached the height of their [music]
wealth and influence. They were no
longer just trading outposts, but
powerful [music] cities that controlled
trade, shaped local politics, and spread
Greek culture across the region. The
Greek cities interacted with, [music]
traded with, and influenced various
native peoples. In southern Italy, that
included groups like the [music]
Enotrians and later the Lucanians and
Bruttians. In Sicily, it included
peoples such as the Sicels. Over time,
many local communities adopted elements
of Greek life in a process known as
Hellenization.
They began writing their own languages
using alphabets inspired by Greek
models, worshipped [music] Greek gods
alongside their own, and built monuments
inspired by Greek models, and even
copied Greek styles of art and daily
life. But these changes weren't the same
everywhere. Some regions became true
melting pots, [music] where strong local
traditions were preserved alongside
Greek influences. Later Greek and Roman
authors looked at the [music] Greek
cities of southern Italy and Sicily and
described how extensive they had become.
Strabo writes that the Greeks increased
in power so much that they called this
part of Italy, together with Sicily,
Magna Graecia. At their height, during
the 5th century, the cities of Magna
Graecia ranked among the most prosperous
in the western Mediterranean. Their
fertile farmland produced large food
surpluses, while their ports controlled
major trade routes between Greece,
Italy, and the wider world. And in the
wider Greek West, Sicily produced
giants, too. Syracuse, on the island of
Sicily, is sometimes described as the
crown jewel of the Greek West due to its
impressive influence, massive wealth,
and strategic maritime location. Over
time, it became so powerful that it
rivaled the greatest city-states of the
Greek world in culture, size, and
influence. The Roman orator and
statesman Cicero famously praised
Syracuse as the largest of the Greek
cities and one of the most beautiful.
But Syracuse was not alone. Many other
cities of Magna Graecia also rose to
challenge its claim to greatness. During
this period, the Achaean city of Sybaris
on mainland Italy also flourished. Many
ancient writers even claim that, during
this time,
and some claim it was the wealthiest
colony in the Archaic world.
According to Diodorus Siculus, the city
was heavily populated with as many as
300,000 inhabitants and an enormous
army. However, most historians believe
these numbers were greatly exaggerated.
In fact, ancient writers often present
the 300,000 figure as men under arms,
not a realistic head count of the city
itself. But when we consider the idea
that the city had a generous citizenship
policy, welcoming large numbers of
foreigners, and how it ruled over an
extensive territory, including as many
as 25 subject cities, the core [music]
point still holds, even if the numbers
don't. Sybaris was wealthy, expansive,
and influential. The people of Sybaris
became famous throughout the ancient
world for their love of luxury and
comfort. [music]
Thanks to the city's immense wealth, the
Sybarites lived in large homes, wore
fine clothing, and enjoyed rich food,
music, and entertainment.
According to Athenaeus, they were so
dedicated to their life of comfort that
they developed an almost unbelievably
advanced piece of infrastructure to
support their indulgent lifestyle. In
his writings, [music]
he claimed the Sybarites created a
complex network of underground pipes
that transported wine from their
vineyards in the countryside right to
the sellers near the sea. Historians
still debate whether Athenaeus' stories
served as a cautionary tale about
excessive luxury or simply reflect
exaggeration.
And there's no archaeological
confirmation for a wine pipeline as
[music] described. Even so, most agree
that Sybaris was exceptionally wealthy
and its inhabitants lived a comfortable
life. One of Sybaris' greatest rivals
[music] during this era was Croton,
which lay around 40 miles to its [music]
south. By combining military power, rich
farmland, and strong intellectual
leadership, Croton established itself as
a dominant force in southern Italy.
The city was surrounded by fertile land,
which allowed it to develop a strong
agricultural based economy. With a
substantial surplus of food, it created
not only wealth but sustenance to
support a growing population.
Ancient and modern estimates vary
widely, but it may have been numbered in
the tens of thousands at its peak.
Croton also minted its own silver coins
known as staters. They were highly
valued and widely used throughout the
Mediterranean, further establishing
itself as an economic powerhouse.
Sometime around 530 BC, the philosopher
and mathematician Pythagoras settled in
Croton and founded his famous school.
Over time, his followers, the
Pythagoreans, gained influence shaping
the city's governing body known as the
Council of 1,000. Ancient tradition
suggests the Pythagoreans gained real
political influence in Croton, though
the exact institutions and details are
debated and may reflect later
storytelling about a backlash against
elite rule. Under their influence,
Croton became a center for mathematics,
science, philosophy, and other arts,
attracting scholars from across the
Greek world. Pythagoras promoted a
strict and orderly way of life that
focused on health, balance, and
self-control. His ideas shaped not only
daily life but also the politics and
culture of the city. At its peak, Croton
possessed one of the most powerful
armies in Magna Graecia. Its soldiers
were famed for their physical strength
and discipline shaped by a way of life
that heavily emphasized training and
sobriety. That power was put to the test
at the end of the 6th century when they
were drawn into war with Sybaris. The
conflict was sparked by long-standing
territorial disputes and a political
crisis triggered when hundreds of exiled
Sybarites took refuge in Croton. This is
the pattern you keep seeing in the Greek
West. A city does not fall because it is
weak. It falls because politics turn
into panic and panic turns into war. In
510 BC, the Croton army marched into
Sybaris under the leadership of Milo of
Croton, a famous Olympic champion.
Croton emerged victorious and the once
wealthy city of Sybaris was destroyed,
bringing a sudden and dramatic end to
its power and splendor. Some historians
see this event as the beginning of Magna
Graecia's slow decline. In the centuries
that followed, many of its once powerful
cities gradually lost their influence
and eventually their independence. By
the 5th and 4th centuries BC, Magna
Graecia cities such as Thurii,
Hipponium, Terina, and Poseidonia were
frequently attacked by Italic peoples
including the Lucanians and Bruttians.
In some cases, the cities were
completely taken over such as Hipponium,
which fell to the Bruttians. Poseidonia
was also conquered by the Lucanians, who
renamed it Paestum. Sicily, meanwhile,
followed its own brutal rhythm. For
centuries, the island had been split in
two. Phoenician-Carthaginian
settlements like Motya and Panormus
dominated the west while Greek cities
such as Syracuse and Akragas controlled
the east. The island was rarely at peace
as the two sides found themselves at war
for the better part of three centuries.
Known as the Sicilian or Greco-Punic
Wars, both sides fought for more control
of the island's lucrative trade routes
and fertile land. Carthage dealt
devastating blows to several Greek
cities on the island. In 409 BC, it
destroyed several settlements including
Selinus. That same year, the
Carthaginian general Hannibal Mago led
the sack of Himera. This is not Hannibal
Barca, the later commander of the Punic
Wars, but an earlier Carthaginian
general from the Magonid family. Just a
few years later in 406, Carthaginian
forces captured and sacked Akragas, one
of the wealthiest Greek cities in the
Mediterranean. But the Greek cities on
the island had their own fair share of
victories. Carthage ultimately failed in
its efforts to take over the entire
island. One of their greatest defeats
came in 397 BC during an attempt to
besiege Syracuse. The Carthaginian army
was decimated by the plague and sensing
the weakness, Dionysius I,
who served as the military leader of
Syracuse, launched a major counterattack
by land and sea. The Greek soldiers
struck the Punic fleet at the Bay of
Dascon and they also stormed the
Carthaginian camp near Syracuse. The
result was not the end of Carthage in
Sicily, but a catastrophic setback that
forced the besiegers to abandon Syracuse
and retreat, buying the Greeks time.
Fighting between the Greeks and
Carthaginians continued across Sicily
for more than a century with neither
side finding much success in lasting
control over the island. Finally, in the
early 4th century BC, a series of
settlements repeatedly confirmed a rough
division of the island and a major peace
in 306 BC left Carthage holding the west
while Syracuse retained the east. But
just as things were looking up for the
Greek cities of Sicily, a new threat
appeared, one that threatened all of the
Greeks spread across Italy and its
surrounding territories. During the 4th
century, the Roman Republic to the north
had gained control of central Italy
following its victory [music] in the
Samnite Wars. After this, they started
to look south to the wealthy cities of
Magna Graecia. Over the next few
centuries, Rome used various tactics
including diplomacy, legal treaties, and
overwhelming manpower to gain influence
over and in some cases dismantle the
Greek poleis or cities. Rome's entry
into the deep south often began not with
an invasion but with an invitation.
Many of the Greek cities on mainland
Italy faced a major dilemma. They had
immense wealth but often struggled to
match the manpower of their Italic
rivals in long wars. So in some cases,
they looked to Rome as a useful, albeit
dangerous, bodyguard. When the city of
Thurii called out to Rome and asked for
help to repel a Lucanian invasion in the
mid-280s BC, the Senate happily obliged.
Rome placed a presidium, a garrison,
inside the city. Once Roman soldiers
were inside the walls, the city's
foreign policy was effectively shaped
under Roman influence. It was protection
with a price. Once the garrison is in,
it is very hard to get it out. This
happened throughout parts of southern
Italy with many of the Greek cities
opting for protection instead of letting
their settlements fall to Italic rivals.
But this tactic didn't work with
everyone. Cities like Tarentum
viewed Roman expansion as a negative
thing. This city was a proud Greek
poleis and a Spartan-founded colony.
When Roman ships sailed into their
territory in 282 BC, the Tarentines
attacked, which led to the start of the
Pyrrhic Wars. Realizing they stood no
match against the Roman legions,
Tarentum called in King Pyrrhus of
Epirus to fight on their behalf. He
arrived with around 25,000 well-trained
warriors and war elephants. Pyrrhus
started strong, earning significant
victories over the Romans at Heraclea in
280 BC and then again at Asculum in 279
BC. But he lacked one thing the Romans
had, manpower. After years of war,
Pyrrhus ran out of men and money and in
275 BC, he returned to Greece. A few
years later, in 272 BC, Tarentum finally
fell to Rome. After defeating the Greek
cities, Rome didn't always annex them
the way empires would later annex
provinces. Instead, settlements varied.
Some communities became allied partners
in Rome's Italian system. Some coastal
cities had naval obligations, and over
time, [music]
many places were folded into Roman
citizenship structures through later
reforms. The terms were often
straightforward. Many communities kept
local institutions and elites, but there
was a catch. The Greek cities lost truly
independent foreign policies and were
required to support Rome's wars, usually
with troops, and for some coastal
communities, ships and crews. This did
not instantly create Rome's navy by
itself, but it did give Rome access to
experienced sailors, ship crews, and
maritime know-how from the Greek south
and other Italian allies as Rome became
a Mediterranean power. At the same time,
Rome began to absorb the Greek elites,
rewarding them with a share of the
wealth taken in future wars. The real
end of Magna Graecia's political
independence on the mainland came in the
270s BC, but the moment that made many
Greek cities fully understand what Roman
power meant came during the Second Punic
War. During the Second Punic War, some
major Greek cities broke with Rome and
sided with the Carthaginians, hoping the
chaos would restore lost freedom. Cities
like Tarentum and Syracuse hoped this
alliance would restore their lost
freedoms. Rome's response, however, was
swift and brutal. When Syracuse fell in
212 BC, the Romans looted its vast
wealth, and many people were killed in
the fighting and aftermath, while others
were enslaved and its treasures carried
off. A few years later, when Rome
recaptured Tarentum in 209 BC after it
had defected to Hannibal's side, it too
faced the wrath of the Romans. Many were
killed in the fighting and reprisals,
and tens of thousands of inhabitants
were sold into slavery, while vast
amounts of wealth and art were taken
from the city. By the end of the Second
Punic War in 201 BC, Magna Graecia was
no longer a collection of independent
Greek city-states. Almost all of its
cities found themselves firmly under
Roman control. Yet, Greek influence did
not disappear. In the centuries that
followed, Greek language and culture
continued to shape the Roman world.
Greek artistic styles inspired Roman
sculpture and painting. Roman religion
adopted Greek aspects and ideas, such as
the worship of Apollo, and education in
philosophy remained heavily Hellenic.
Greek culture lingered on into the Roman
Imperial period. Neapolis, or Naples, is
one famous example where a strong Greek
culture survived. During the early
empire, the city hosted prestigious
Greek-style festivals and competitions,
[music] including the Sebasta games, and
Romans who loved Greek theater and music
treated Neapolis as a Greek place inside
Italy. However, in other areas, the
Greek language started to fade. In many
of the former Greek cities, Greek and
Latin existed side by side in different
ways, depending on the place and period.
But for Roman law, administration, and
the military in the Western Empire,
Latin increasingly dominated. By the
Imperial era, many once-famous Greek
cities had shrunk in political
importance, and some sites [music]
were partly abandoned or rebuilt on a
smaller scale. Writers like Strabo and
later Roman commentators noted that the
landscape of the south was full of
famous names, but not always famous
cities anymore. After the Western Roman
Empire collapsed in the 5th century AD,
a new phase began. From the 6th century
onward, Byzantine reconquests and long
Byzantine rule in parts of the south,
plus later waves of migration and
resettlement from the Greek-speaking
east, helped keep Greek language and
Eastern Christian traditions alive in
pockets of Italy. And so,
>> [music]
>> even as Roman administration in the west
collapsed, Greek language and Byzantine
Christian traditions survived in parts
of southern Italy for centuries to come,
long after the classical period had
ended. Greek survived well into Norman
times in parts of the south, and today,
there are still small pockets of
Greek-speaking communities in Italy.
[music] Known as the Griko peoples,
these minority groups are found mostly
in the Bovesia area of Calabria and the
Salento peninsula of Apulia, and are
considered the descendants of ancient
and medieval Greek communities. Their
exact origins are debated. Some scholars
emphasize direct continuity from Magna
Graecia. Others emphasize medieval
Byzantine era roots, and many see a
blend of both. While they speak a unique
form of Greek shaped by both Byzantine
and Italian influences, they continue to
pass down stories, create music, and
preserve oral traditions that reflect
their ancient Hellenic heritage. These
communities are not a museum piece, but
a living echo of a world that once lined
this coastline, a Greek south inside
Italy.